.TH DATASELECT 1 2015/02/19
.SH NAME
Mini-SEED data selection, sorting and pruning

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
dataselect [options] file1 [file2 file3 ...]
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBdataselect\fP selects, sorts and prunes Mini-SEED data.  Any output
data will always be sorted by ascending time-series segments.  Various
data selection operations are possible including time criteria, the
removal of duplicate data and the splicing of partially overlapping
data records to form continuous time-series.

Data pruning, removal of overlap, can be performed at either the
record or sample level.  Pruning at the record level guarantees that
records are never unpacked/repacked, but this could potentially leave
small amounts of overlap in the data.  Pruning at the sample level
will remove any overlap and splice data to within the time-series
tolerance, this requires the unpacking and repacking of data records
and is done in a modification-minimizing way.

When removing overlapping data records or samples the concept of
priority is used to determine from which time-series data should be
removed if overlaps are detected.  By default the priority is given to
the highest quality data (M > Q > D > R).  When the qualities are the
same priority is given to the longer segment.

Multiple input files will be read in the order specified and processed
all together as if all the data records were from the same file.  The
program must read input data from files, input from pipes, etc. is not
possible.

Files on the command line prefixed with a '@' character are input list
files and are expected to contain a simple list of input files, see
\fBINPUT LIST FILE\fP for more details.

Each input file may be specified with an explict byte range to read.
The program will begin reading at the specified start offset and stop
reading at the specified end range.  See \fBINPUT FILE RANGE\fP for
more details.

When a input file is full SEED including both SEED headers and data
records all of the headers will be skipped and completely unprocessed.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "-V         "
Print program version and exit.

.IP "-h         "
Print program usage and exit.

.IP "-H         "
Print verbose program usage including details of archive format
specification and exit.

.IP "-v         "
Be more verbose.  This flag can be used multiple times ("-v -v" or
"-vv") for more verbosity.

.IP "-tt \fIsecs\fP"
Specify a time tolerance for constructing continous trace
segments. The tolerance is specified in seconds.  The default
tolerance is 1/2 of the sample period.

.IP "-rt \fIdiff\fP"
Specify a sample rate tolerance for constructing continous trace
segments. The tolerance is specified as the difference between two
sampling rates.  The default tolerance is tested as: (abs(1-sr1/sr2) <
0.0001).

.IP "-E\fP"
Consider all data qualities equal when determining priority for
pruning.  By default priority is given the the data with the highest
quality indicator: (highest) Q > D > R (lowest).

.IP "-sb \fIsize\fP"
Use an internal buffer of \fIsize\fP bytes (\fBK\fP, \fBM\fP and
\fBG\fP suffixes recognized) to store records during the initial read
and use them for output instead of re-reading the files.  Useful for
speeding up reads from slow network storage, but not always faster due
to OS and other caching.

.IP "-s \fIselectfile\fP"
Limit processing to Mini-SEED records that match a selection in the
specified file.  The selection file contains parameters to match the
network, station, location, channel, quality and time range for input
records.  As a special case, specifying "-" will result in selection
lines being read from stdin.  For more details see the \fBSELECTION
FILE\fP section below.

.IP "-ts \fItime\fP"
Limit processing to Mini-SEED records that start after or contain
\fItime\fP.  The format of the \fItime\fP argument
is: 'YYYY[,DDD,HH,MM,SS,FFFFFF]' where valid delimiters are either
commas (,), colons (:) or periods (.).

.IP "-te \fItime\fP"
Limit processing to Mini-SEED records that end before or contain
\fItime\fP.  The format of the \fItime\fP argument
is: 'YYYY[,DDD,HH,MM,SS,FFFFFF]' where valid delimiters are either
commas (,), colons (:) or periods (.).

.IP "-M \fImatch\fP"
Limit input to records that match this regular expression, the
\fImatch\fP is tested against the full source
name: 'NET_STA_LOC_CHAN_QUAL'.  If the match expression begins with
an '@' character it is assumed to indicate a file containing a list of
expressions to match, see the \fBMATCH OR REJECT LIST FILE\fP section
below.

.IP "-R \fIreject\fP"
Limit input to records that do not match this regular expression, the
\fIreject\fP is tested against the full source
name: 'NET_STA_LOC_CHAN_QUAL'.  If the reject expression begins with
an '@' character it is assumed to indicate a file containing a list of
expressions to reject, see the \fBMATCH OR REJECT LIST FILE\fP
section below.

.IP "-szs"
Skip records that contain zero samples, generally these are detection
records, etc.

.IP "-lso"
Longest segement only.  Limit the output to the longest continuous
segment for each channel.

.IP "-msl \fIseconds\fP"
Specify minimum segment length, no continuous segments shorter than
\fIseconds\fP in duration will be written to the output.

.IP "-m \fImatch\fP"
This is effectively the same as \fB-M\fP except that \fImatch\fP is
evaluated as a globbing expression instead of regular expression.
Otherwise undocumented as it is primarily useful at the IRIS DMC.

.IP "-rep"
Replace input files.  By default this will rename the original files
by adding a '.orig' suffix.

.IP "-nb"
Do not keep backups of renamed original input files if replacing them
by using the \fI-rep\fP option.

.IP "-o \fIfile\fP"
Write all output data to output \fIfile\fP instead of replacing the
original files.  When this option is used no backups will be created
and the original files will not be modified in any way.  If '-' is
specified as the output file all output data will be written to
standard out.  By default the output file will be overwritten,
changing the option to \fI+o file\fP appends to the output file.

.IP "-A \fIformat\fP"
All output records will be written to a directory/file layout defined
by \fIformat\fP.  All directories implied in the \fIformat\fP string
will be created if necessary.  The option may be used multiple times
to write input records to multiple archives.  See the \fBARCHIVE
FORMAT\fP section below for more details including pre-defined archive
layouts.

.IP "-CHAN \fIdirectory\fP"
.IP "-QCHAN \fIdirectory\fP"
.IP "-CDAY \fIdirectory\fP"
.IP "-SDAY \fIdirectory\fP"
.IP "-BUD \fIdirectory\fP"
.IP "-CSS \fIdirectory\fP"
Pre-defined output archive formats, see the \fBArchive Format\fP
section below for more details.

.IP "-Pr         "
Prune, remove overlap data, at the record level.  This will result in
removal of all the completely overlapped data records.  Small,
partial-record overlaps might remain in the data.

.IP "-Ps         "
Prune, remove overlap data, at the sample level.  This will result in
removal of all the completely overlapped data samples.  When data
records partially overlap the lowest priority record is unpacked,
trimmed and repacked.  Record trimming requires a supported data
encoding, if unsupported (primarily older encodings) the record will
be in the output untrimmed.

.IP "-Pe         "
Prune (trim) returned traces to user specified edges (start and end
times) at the sample level. This option will not remove overlap data
within specified start and end time window.  Caveats the same as for
\fB-Ps\fP.

.IP "-S[dhm]      "
Split records on day, hour or minute boundaries.  When data records
span the split boundary (day, hour or minute) the record will be split
by duplicating the record and trimming both records such they are
continous across the boundaries.  Both of the records will have the
same record number.

.IP "-rls         "
Split output files on record length changes by adding integer suffixes
to the file names.  This option only works when writing output files
using the \fI-A\fP argument (or a pre-defined layout).  Suffixes are
in the form of ".######" where the # is an integer starting at 1 and
are left padded with zeros up to 6 digits.

.IP "-Q DRQM      "
Change the data quality indicator for all output records to the
specified quality: D, R, Q or M.

.IP "-sum         "
Print a basic summary of input data after reading all the files.

.IP "-mod         "
Print a file modification summary after processing an input group.
For files specified on the command line all files constitute a group.
By default this summary will only include the files that were
modified, if the verbose option is used the summary will include all
files processed.

.IP "-out file    "
Print a summary of output records to the specified file.  Any existing
file will be appended to.  Specify the file as '-' to print to stdout
or '--' to print to stderr.  Each line contains network, station,
location, channel, quality, start time, end time, byte count and
sample count for each output trace segment.

.IP "-outprefix prefix"
Include the specified prefix string at the beginning of each line of
summary output when using the \fI-out\fP option.  This is useful to
identify the summary output in a stream that is potentially mixed with
other output.

.SH THE PRUNING PROCESS

The pruning algorithm used is independant of the file structure and
organization.  Data from all input files are parsed and a map created
for every data record and their relationship in continuous time
series segments.

Each data record time coverage in each continuous time-series is
compared to the time coverage of every other continous time-series.
When overlap is detected, data is optionally removed from the lower
priority time-series until the overlap is minimized or completely
removed depending on the pruning option specified.

.SH "SELECTION FILE"
A selection file is used to match input data records based on network,
station, location and channel information.  Optionally a quality and
time range may also be specified for more refined selection.  The
non-time fields may use the '*' wildcard to match multiple characters
and the '?' wildcard to match single characters.  Character sets may
also be used, for example '[ENZ]' will match either E, N or Z.
The '#' character indicates the remaining portion of the line will be
ignored.

Example selection file entires (the first four fields are required)
.nf
#net sta  loc  chan  qual  start             end
IU   ANMO *    BH?
II   *    *    *     Q     
IU   COLA 00   LH[ENZ] R
IU   COLA 00   LHZ   *     2008,100,10,00,00 2008,100,10,30,00
.fi

.SH "INPUT LIST FILE"
A list file can be used to specify input files, one file per line.
The initial '@' character indicating a list file is not considered
part of the file name.  As an example, if the following command line
option was used:

.nf
\fB@files.list\fP
.fi

The 'files.list' file might look like this:

.nf
data/day1.mseed
data/day2.mseed
data/day3.mseed
.fi

.SH "INPUT FILE RANGE"
Each input file may be specified with an associated byte range to
read.  The program will begin reading at the specified start offset
and finish reading when at or beyond the end offset.  The range is
specified by appending an '@' charater to the filename with the start
and end offsets separated by a colon:

.nf
filename.mseed@<startoffset>:<endoffset>
.fi

For example: "filename.mseed:4096:8192".  Both the start and end
offsets are optional.  The colon separator is optional if no end
offset is specified.

.SH "MATCH OR REJECT LIST FILE"
A list file used with either the \fB-M\fP or \fB-R\fP contains a list
of regular expressions (one on each line) that will be combined into a
single compound expression.  The initial '@' character indicating a
list file is not considered part of the file name.  As an example, if
the following command line option was used:

.nf
\fB-M @match.list\fP
.fi

The 'match.list' file might look like this:

.nf
IU_ANMO_.*
IU_ADK_00_BHZ.*
II_BFO_00_BHZ_Q
.fi

.SH "ARCHIVE FORMAT"
The pre-defined archive layouts are as follows:

.nf
-CHAN dir   :: dir/%n.%s.%l.%c
-QCHAN dir  :: dir/%n.%s.%l.%c.%q
-CDAY dir   :: dir/%n.%s.%l.%c.%Y:%j:#H:#M:#S
-SDAY dir   :: dir/%n.%s.%Y:%j
-BUD dir    :: dir/%n/%s/%s.%n.%l.%c.%Y.%j
-CSS dir    :: dir/%Y/%j/%s.%c.%Y:%j:#H:#M:#S
.fi

An archive format is expanded for each record using the following
substitution flags:

.nf
  \fBn\fP : network code, white space removed
  \fBs\fP : station code, white space removed
  \fBl\fP : location code, white space removed
  \fBc\fP : channel code, white space removed
  \fBY\fP : year, 4 digits
  \fBy\fP : year, 2 digits zero padded
  \fBj\fP : day of year, 3 digits zero padded
  \fBH\fP : hour, 2 digits zero padded
  \fBM\fP : minute, 2 digits zero padded
  \fBS\fP : second, 2 digits zero padded
  \fBF\fP : fractional seconds, 4 digits zero padded
  \fBq\fP : single character record quality indicator (D, R, Q)
  \fBL\fP : data record length in bytes
  \fBr\fP : sample rate (Hz) as a rounded integer
  \fBR\fP : sample rate (Hz) as a float with 6 digit precision
  \fB%\fP : the percent (%) character
  \fB#\fP : the number (#) character
.fi

The flags are prefaced with either the \fB%\fP or \fB#\fP modifier.
The \fB%\fP modifier indicates a defining flag while the \fB#\fP
indicates a non-defining flag.  All records with the same set of
defining flags will be written to the same file.  Non-defining flags
will be expanded using the values in the first record for the
resulting file name.

Time flags are based on the start time of the given record.

.SH EXAMPLES

The format string for the predefined \fIBUD\fP layout:

\fB/archive/%n/%s/%s.%n.%l.%c.%Y.%j\fP

would expand to day length files named something like:

\fB/archive/NL/HGN/HGN.NL..BHE.2003.055\fP

As an example of using non-defining flags the format string for the
predefined \fICSS\fP layout:

\fB/data/%Y/%j/%s.%c.%Y:%j:#H:#M:#S\fP

would expand to:

\fB/data/2003/055/HGN.BHE.2003:055:14:17:54\fP

resulting in day length files because the hour, minute and second are
specified with the non-defining modifier.  The hour, minute and second
fields are from the first record in the file.

.SH ERROR HANDLING AND RETURN CODES
Any significant error message will be pre-pended with "ERROR" which
can be parsed to determine run-time errors.  Additionally the program
will return an exit code of 0 on successful operation and 1 when any
errors were encountered.

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Chad Trabant
IRIS Data Management Center
.fi
